How to Write and Run a C Program in Linux?
Linux is becoming a programming heaven for developers, being an open source and free operating system. Turbo C compiler is already an old approach to compile programs so let us programmers move to Linux for a new programming environment. In this article, we will explain how to write, compile and run a simple C program. This will serve as a basis for you to move to more complicated and useful C programs that you can write and execute on Linux.
We have run the steps and commands mentioned in this article on an Ubuntu 18.04 LTS system.
We will be using the Linux command line tool, the Terminal, in order to compile a simple C program. To open the Terminal, you can use the Ubuntu Dash or the Ctrl+Alt+T shortcut.
Step 1: Install the build-essential packages
In order to compile and execute a C program, you need to have the essential packages installed on your system. Enter the following command as root in your Linux Terminal:
$ sudo apt-get install build-essential
 
You will be asked to enter the password for root; the installation process will begin after that. Please make sure that you are connected to the internet.
Step 2: Write a simple C program
After installing the essential packages, let us write a simple C program.
Open Ubuntu’s graphical Text Editor and write or copy the following sample program into it:
#include<stdio.h>
int main()
{
printf("\nA sample C program\n\n");
return 0;
}
Then save the file with .c extension. In this example, I am naming my C program as sampleProgram.c
 
Alternatively, you can write the C program through the Terminal in gedit as follows: here gedit, vi is like notepad is called file editor.
$ gedit sampleProgram.c
Or
$ vi sampleProgram.c
This will create a .c file where you can write and save a program.
Step 3: Compile the C program with gcc
In your Terminal, enter the following command in order to make an executable version of the program you have written:
Syntax:
$ gcc [programName].c -o programName
Example:
$ gcc sampleProgram.c -o sampleProgram
Or
$ gcc –Wall sampleProgram.c –o outputfilename
 
The option –Wall enables all compilers warning messages. This option is recommended to generate better code. Option –o is used to specify the output file name. if we do not use this option, then an output file with name a.out is be generated.

Make sure your program is located in your Home folder. Otherwise, you will need to specify appropriate paths in this command.
Step 4: Run the program
The final step is to run the compiled C program. Use the following syntax to do so:
$ ./programName
Example:
$ ./sampleProgram
 
You can see how the program is executed in the above example, displaying the text we wrote to print through it. you have learned how to write, compile and run a simple C program in Linux. 
Run program in online: (when your system or compiler not available) 
url: https://www.onlinegdb.com/online_c_compiler
